Department of Forestry
Annual Performance Progress Report
Reporting Year 2024
Published: 8/2/2024 4:55:41 PM
KPM #
Approved Key Performance Measures (KPMs)
CUSTOMER SERVICE TO COUNTY 'GOVERNMENTS AND FOREST LANDOWNERS
- Percent of Oregon’s forested counties and forest protective associations rating that ODF programs collectively provide “good” or “excellent” customer service:
overall, timeliness, accuracy, helpfulness, expertise, availability of information.
BOARD OF FORESTRY PERFORMANCE
- Percent of total best practices met by the Board of Forestry.
FOREST PRACTICES ACT COMPLIANCE
- Percent of forest operations that are in compliance with the Forest Practices Act
URBAN AND COMMUNITY FOREST MANAGEMENT
- Percent of Oregon cities actively managing their urban and community forest resources.
STATE FORESTS TOTAL REVENUE
- Percent increase in total revenue produced by State Forests
AIR QUALITY PROTECTION
- Total number of smoke intrusions into designated areas per total number of units burned.
PERCENTAGE OF PRIVATE FORESTLAND MANAGED AT OR ABOVE FOREST PRACTICES ACT STANDARDS. - Percentage of industrial private forestlands managed under an approved certification system, stewardship agreement, or other
approved management plan including wildlife habitat conservation and management plans
FOREST STREAM WATER QUALITY - Percent of monitored stream sites associated predominately with forestland with significantly increasing trends in water quality.
VOLUNTARY PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENTS MADE TO CREATE HEALTHY FORESTS
- Cumulative public and private forest landowner investments made in voluntary projects for the Oregon Plan for Salmon and Watersheds or for the
Oregon Conservation Strategy.
STATE FORESTS NORTH COAST HABITAT
- Complex forest structure as a percent of the State Forests landscape.
FIRE SUPPRESSION EFFECTIVENESS
- Percent of wildland forest fires under ODF jurisdiction controlled at 10 acres or less.
PREVENTION OF HUMAN-CAUSED WILDLAND FOREST FIRES
- Number of Oregon residents per human-caused wildland forest fires. (population expressed in thousands of residents)
This metric measures the ability to maintain or reduce the
number of human-caused wildfires as the population of Oregon increases. An upward trend indicates a positive result.
DAMAGE TO OREGON FORESTS FROM INSECTS, DISEASES, AND OTHER AGENTS
- Percent of forest lands without significant damage mortality as assessed by aerial surveys.
Performance Summary
Green
Yellow
Red
= Target to -5%
= Target -5% to -15%
= Target > -15%
Summary Stats:
23.08%
23.08%
53.85%
red
green
yellow
KPM #1 CUSTOMER SERVICE TO COUNTY 'GOVERNMENTS AND FOREST LANDOWNERS - Percent of Oregon’s forested counties and forest protective associations rating that ODF programs
collectively provide “good” or “excellent” customer service: overall, timeliness, accuracy, helpfulness, expertise, availability of information.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Availability of Information
Actual 100% 80% 75% 83% 83%
Target 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
Overall
Actual 100% 60% 75% 100% 83%
Target 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
Helpfulness
Actual 100% 100% 100% 100% 83%
Target 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
Expertise
Actual 100% 100% 100% 100% 83%
Target 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
Timeliness
Actual 88% 100% 75% 100% 67%
Target 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
Accuracy
Actual 88% 80% 100% 100% 80%
Target 95% 95% 95% 95% 95%
The Department of Forestry strives to exceed expectations in service to Oregon's forested counties and forest protective associations. Results from this year's survey indicate that while Department
employees have demonstrated local success in building strong relationships within our communities and providing service to Oregonians, the complex sociopolitical, multi-jurisdictional landscape, and
challenging regulatory environment continues to challenge our ability to meet expectations in service to all.
Factors Affecting Results
The department’s mission is to serve the people of Oregon by protecting, managing, and promoting stewardship of Oregon’s forests to enhance environmental, economic, and community
sustainability. One of the agency’s core values is excellent, efficient, and effective service.
Sentiments shared this year indicated that our employees are knowledgeable, responsive, and helpful in providing timely information, even amongst challenging wildfire seasons and changes in
regulation implementation; our fire response was characterized as excellent, attuned to local conditions in the communities served, and professional in our partnerships; employees are knowledgeable
in their respective fields and the department operations as a whole; and our field staff are consistently available to exchange information, data, and policy recommendations.
The positive results of this performance measure directly correlate to the investments made between Department staff and county commissioners, county officials, forest protective associations and
forest landowners to build effective working relationships across all jurisdictions and forestry programs.
Less desirable results were also indicated within this year’s performance evaluation; however, there were no additional comments or feedback on those ratings to reflect upon opportunities for
improvement. Local knowledge of known issues indicates a challenging regulatory environment may have been a contributing factor and reflected upon as a perceived level of service within the multi-
jurisdictional landscape.
Maintaining balance across these sociopolitical factors is complex and the tensions embedded within this landscape will continue to be reflected in the evaluation of this performance measure. The
Department of Forestry will continue to strive to exceed expectations in service to Oregon's forested counties and forest protective associations.
How Are We Doing
KPM #2 BOARD OF FORESTRY PERFORMANCE - Percent of total best practices met by the Board of Forestry.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Oregon Board of Forestry Governance
Actual 89% 84% 97% 92% 84%
Target 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
How Are We Doing
The Board of Forestry concluded the annual board governance performance evaluation with common agreement in meeting 84 percent of the standard best-practices criteria. Results of the evaluation
suggest that current board members see the board functioning in a less than satisfactory manner across the majority of best practices in governance. The Board was unable to meet their performance
measure target of 100 percent for the 2023 evaluation period, reported in 2024.
Factors Affecting Results
Three of the seven board members serving in the 2023 calendar period completed the evaluation. This is a shift from the prior five years where one or two board members did not participate annually
in the evaluation, and the last year where all seven board members completed theirs. Two of the seven board members serving in 2023 also resigned from their seats this reporting year with the
Senate confirming two newly appointed board members shortly after. A full membership of the Board reviewed a summary of the collective results from the three participating board members at the
June 2024 board meeting, approving completion of the evaluation with common agreement in reaching 84 percent of their best practices in governance as compared to the prior year’s evaluation of 92
percent.
The Board found common agreement in meeting best practices of governance, consistent with past evaluations related to:
defined performance expectations for the State Forester and recent evaluation,
review of the agency’s annual key performance measures, biennial budget, key financial information and audit findings as they are released,
agency adherence to accounting rules and financial controls,
board members responsibly serving as public representatives, attending appropriate training and technical information sessions, utilizing outreach and engagement of stakeholders and special
interest committees.
However, further improvement in board governance best practices is desired by participating board members related to:
completion of the Board’s strategic plan with current agency mission, high-level goals, and defined strategic initiatives and priorities,
appropriate involvement in review of the agency’s key policy communications,
increasing involvement in the Private Forests Accord policy-making activities,
aligning the agency’s policy option packages with their mission and goals through the biennial budgeting process,
accounting and briefing on Human Resources trends and issues, with considerable improvement desired relevant to Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI),
engaging in collaborative coordination and efficient work where responsibilities and interests overlap with other state and federal agencies and tribal nations, and
implementing adaptive management effectively to ensure best practices are utilized beyond the planning and evaluation cycles.
Reflections from the participating board members indicate polarization and challenges associated with controversial forest policy issues, interference from within the Executive Branch, and operating
without a completed strategic plan and shared vision to guide decision-making, as factors affecting the Board’s collective results in this performance measure.
KPM #3 FOREST PRACTICES ACT COMPLIANCE - Percent of forest operations that are in compliance with the Forest Practices Act
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Percent of Operations in Compliance with Oregon’s Forest Practices Act
Actual
Target 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
How Are We Doing
The Oregon Forest Practices Act (FPA) outlines standards of practice for forest operations on non-federal and non-tribal lands in Oregon. The FPA is administered by the Oregon Department of
Forestry’s (ODF) Forest Resources Division. Within the Forest Resources Division, the Monitoring Unit is tasked with developing studies to evaluate landowner compliance with the FPA rules at a
state-wide scale.
The ODF Monitoring Unit contracted Mount Hood Environmental (MHE) to develop a statistical study design and complete data analysis for two ODF Compliance Monitoring efforts: 1) Reforestation
study and, 2) Long-Term Compliance Monitoring study.
Using lessons learned from a pilot reforestation study, MHE developed a protocol for the 2023-2024 Reforestation study. The study focused on evaluating OAR  629-610-0040(4), a rule which requires
landowners to have established a free-to-grow stand of trees by the end of six years after harvesting that meet or exceed the minimum stocking levels required by OAR 629-010-0020. A total of 65
sites were surveyed with 8 sites surveyed twice for quality control. Reforestation compliance results will be included in future KPM reporting.
ODF is also working with MHE on the development of a Long-Term Compliance Monitoring study that prioritizes the following rule divisions: Division 625 Forest Road Construction and Maintenance
rules; Division 630 Harvesting rules for steep slopes; Division 643 Water Protection Rules: Vegetation Along Streams rules. ODF will conduct pilot studies, one for each prioritized rule set. The pilot
studies will help the Monitoring Unit identify the most effective and efficient study design and field sampling approach for determining rule compliance rates.
participate, including industrial and family timberland owners, conservation organizations, and other state agencies such as the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) and the Oregon
Department of Agriculture (ODA). The ODF has been convening the CMPC quarterly since February 2023 providing the committee with regular program updates and integrating their valuable
feedback. In addition, the CMPC developed a charter that will be reviewed and updated annually at the end of the year.
Factors Affecting Results
The 2023-2024 Reforestation compliance monitoring study evaluated stands replanted prior to the passage of the new FPA rules. Under previous rules participation in ODF’s compliance monitoring
studies was voluntary. Participation refusal and landowner non-response reduced the sample population for the study. The new FPA rules were designed to improve compliance monitoring study
designs, making analyses more robust, now that landowners are required to notify of activity completion; and provide ODF access to their sites.
As part of the development of the Long-Term Compliance Monitoring program, ODF staff with assistance from the Compliance Monitoring Program Committee (CMPC), began the process of
reviewing the prioritized rule sets to determine the rules most suitable to include in the pilot studies. Ability to measure, time since activity occurred, and feasibility of effort are some of the factors being
considered when determining rule inclusion.
The ODF Monitoring Unit reconvened the Compliance Monitoring Program Committee (CMPC) in 2023. Stakeholders with knowledge of the FPA rules representing varied interests were invited to
KPM #4 URBAN AND COMMUNITY FOREST MANAGEMENT - Percent of Oregon cities actively managing their urban and community forest resources.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Percent of Oregon cities actively managing their urban and community forest resources
Actual 38% 38% 33.60% 31% 30%
Target 50% 50% 50% 50% 50%
How Are We Doing
The mission of the Urban & Community Forestry (UCF) Program is to help all Oregonians improve their quality of life by promoting community investment in our state’s urban forests. UCF Program
staff assist communities of all sizes by sharing a wide range of technical, educational, and organizational "Best Management Practices" through onsite visits and training, webinars, newsletters, email,
and video conferencing. When funding is available, the UCF Program also provides grants and financial assistance to cities and community groups to help them build organizational capacity and
support local UCF planning, maintenance, and training efforts. In 2023, the UCF Program was awarded $26.6 million in Federal Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) funding to design and administer two
distinct grant subaward programs for disadvantaged communities throughout the state. One subaward program is intended specifically for the nine Federally Recognized Tribes of Oregon, the second
is intended for other qualifying entities, which includes tribal organizations or coalitions, local governmental entities such as cities/counties/special districts, academic institutions, as well as non-profit
and community-based organizations. Additionally, as a result of House Bill 3409 which passed last summer, the UCF Program was tasked with assisting the Department of Land Conservation and
Development (DLCD) to design and implement a $6.5 million Community Green Infrastructure Grant Program which will also focus on helping overburdened and underserved communities in our state.
KPM #4 tracks the percentage of Oregon cities and county subdivisions that are deemed to be actively managing their urban and community forests, based on their attainment of at least two out of
four management criteria. The 4 management criteria that we track are whether cities/communities have (1) trained UF professionals on staff, such as an International Society of Arboriculture-certified
arborist or tree worker; (2) a tree ordinance; (3) a tree board or advisory committee; and (4) an inventory-based urban forest management plan. According to the most recent federally reported data,
the percentage of cities meeting two or more of these UCF management criteria – indicating they are pro-actively managing their urban forests -- has dropped slightly from 31 percent in 2022 to 30
percent in 2023. From a population perspective, over 2/3 of Oregon residents live in cities and county subdivisions where their urban and community forests are being intentionally planned and
managed. According to a report compiled by the Arbor Day Foundation in Oregon for the 2023 calendar year, 57% of our state’s residents live in a Tree City USA community, $35,445,203 was spent
on urban forestry management, and a total of 82,547 urban trees were planted.
Factors Affecting Results
Over time, we expect to see fluctuations in communities’ abilities to meet the four UCF management criteria listed above, based on changing budgets and economic conditions, staffing and volunteer
capacity, and community priorities. Although it will take a few years for the full effects of the recent Federal and State investments in UCF to become manifest, we can say with great confidence that
these impacts will be significant and long-lasting, especially in those communities that have traditionally been left behind and have experienced an “opportunity gap”. Within the next 2 years our UCF
team aims to leverage the significant IRA and HB3409 funding to get closer to our statewide target of 50% cities/county subdivision with active UCF management.
2023 was a momentous year for the UCF Program. As a result of the significant influx of Federal and State funding, the UCF team was able to double staffing levels (from 2 FTE to 4 FTE) and
provide far greater support to community partners, especially in small, rural communities. In September, two full-time EAB Support Specialists were hired. Since that time, approximately 1/2 of the full
UCF team’s efforts have been focused on helping to coordinate EAB emergency response and recovery efforts in partnership with our Forest Health team, the Oregon Department of Agriculture, and
Oregon State Extension Service. Thus far, these efforts have really paid off. The EAB infestation has been limited to the cities of Forest Grove and Cornelius. In 2023, UCF Program staff provided
over 1000 assists to private citizens, schools, colleges, and other public entities throughout the state. In 2024, the program’s aim is to double that number.
KPM #5
STATE FORESTS TOTAL REVENUE
- Percent increase in total revenue produced by State Forests
Data Collection Period: Jul 01
- Jun 30
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Percent increase in revenue produced by State Forests compared to the previous year
Actual
9.70%
-24%
12.20%
-19.20%
-2.60%
Target
2%
2%
5%
5%
5%
How Are We Doing
The FY 2023 data show a 2.6 percent decrease in total revenues from the previous year, down to $95,668,759. The amount of revenue distributed to counties decreased 1 percent from the previous
year, $61,816,688 to $61,178,946. This KPM focuses on the percent change in total revenue produced from the sale of timber from State Forests. The Oregon Department of Forestry is committed to
sustainable management of these lands. Harvest levels that contribute to the revenue flow for this measure are set annually by the Division at the direction of the State Forester.
The KPM targets establish an objective for management activities to predictably generate revenue for the State.
Factors Affecting Results
The major factor affecting FY 2023 decrease in timber sale revenue is timing on when revenue is received.  Gross timber sale revenue increased 8.3% and volume increased 0.8%.  21% of the
volume harvested was completed in the last two months of fiscal year.  Payment for harvested volume invoiced in June is not received until July and will be accounted for in FY 2024 for KPM #5.
KPM #6
AIR QUALITY PROTECTION
- Total number of smoke intrusions into designated areas per total number of units burned.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01
- Dec 31
* Upward Trend = negative result
Report Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Total number of smoke intrusions into designated areas per total number of units burned
Actual
0.002
0.001
0.001
0.001
Target
How Are We Doing
The Smoke Management Program is doing an exceptional job of protecting Oregon's air quality while, at the same time, allowing forest landowners to dispose of unwanted accumulations of forest
fuel. One intrusion occurred from1580 units burned. The intrusion definition changed in 2019 to allow for some smoke to enter Smoke Sensitive Receptor Areas at a level that remained below 75
percent of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards. This change will allow for the increase in prescribed burning to eventually reduce the size and damage created by catastrophic wildfire.
Factors Affecting Results
In addition to restoration burning, hazard-fuel reduction, weather variations, and economic market conditions can also influence the outcome, by substantially increasing or decreasing the number of
units available for burning. In 2023 heightened wildfire risk, due to persistent drought conditions, had a direct effect in reduction of the number of units burned, relative to the long-term average.  The
smoke intrusion that were recorded in 2023 was a result of burning done in the “Redmond” area, where smoke drained downriver into Redmond.
KPM #7
PERCENTAGE OF PRIVATE FORESTLAND MANAGED AT OR ABOVE FOREST PRACTICES ACT STANDARDS. - Percentage of industrial private forestlands managed under an
approved certification system, stewardship agreement, or other approved management plan including wildlife habitat conservation and management plans
Data Collection Period: Jul 01
- Jun 30
Report Year
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
a. Percentage of total industrial private forestlands managed under an approved system, agreement, or plan
Actual
69%
68%
70%
72%
74%
Target
90%
90%
90%
90%
90%
b. Percentage of non-industrial private forestlands managed under an approved system, agreement, or plan
Actual
11%
11%
10%
10%
9%
Target
25%
25%
25%
25%
25%
How Are We Doing
Key Performance Measure #7 was modified during the 2019 Legislative Session to report as a percentage of forestland compared to previously reporting on acreage. The legislatively approved target
for this measure is 90 percent of industrial private forestlands and 25 percent of non-industrial private forestlands managed under an approved system, agreement, or plan.
a. Three certification systems operate in Oregon. The American Tree Farm System (ATFS) provides certification endorsed by the Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification schemes
(PEFC). The PEFC is an international, independent, non-profit, non-governmental organization, founded in 1999, which promotes sustainably managed forests through independent third-party
certification. Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) U.S. provides certification verified by Accreditation Services International, an independent accreditation body offering international, third-party
accreditation for voluntary certification schemes. The Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI) provides certification endorsed by the PEFC.
The Department of Forestry (ODF) approves and monitors management plans, under the USDA-Forest Service's State and Private Forestry Program and enters into Stewardship Agreements (ORS
541.423) with forestland owners, who agree to manage beyond FPA standards.
Note: To distinguish between industrial and non-industrial acres and to remain consistent with prior years KPM methods, an acreage threshold was applied to distinguish industrial (> 5,000 acres) from
non-industrial (< 5,000 acres) forestland owners.
ODF requested information on acres of industrial private forestland certified or approved under each system, and 74 percent (4.8 of the 6.5 million acres) of industrial private forestlands are managed
under an approved certification system or stewardship agreement, as summarized below:
Sustainable Forestry Initiative, Inc.               4,115,020 acres
American Tree Farm System                           533,102 acres
Forest Stewardship Council U.S.                     150,328 acres
ODF Stewardship Agreements                          29,395 acres
Total
4,827,845 acres
b. ODF requested information on acres of non-industrial private forestland certified or approved under each system and 9 percent (0.3 million of the 3.7 million acres) of non-industrial private
forestlands are managed under an approved certification system, stewardship agreement, or forest management plan, as summarized below:
ODF; USDA-FS Forest Stewardship Plan         108,431 acres
ODF Stewardship Agreements
2,674 acres
American Tree Farm System
179,705 acres
Forest Stewardship Council U.S.                         28,634 acres
Total
319,444 acres
[1] The ODF Stewardship Agreement and American Tree Farm System reported acres are down from last year’s reporting. Although the program acres may fluctuate some due to various factors, this
overall decline was predictable given the multi-year trend. If the current planning level is to be maintained or increased over the next few years, it will need to be supported either through one-time
funding or the leveraging of other federal programs.
Factors Affecting Results
a. Along with forestry-related agencies and organizations, the marketplace encourages forest certification. Forestland owners wanting to sell timber increasingly find that milling facilities are requiring
their log supply come from certified forests. This market access requirement is motivating landowners to obtain certification from recognized third-party systems. Industrial forestland owners generally
have the capacity to develop procedures to maintain certification.
Domestically and internationally, voluntary forest certification systems are used as a mechanism to recognize forest products originating from lands meeting specific management and harvesting
requirements. Certification involves observation of management and harvesting requirements and is validated through third-party review. Costs are incurred by landowners to certify lands. In turn,
certified forest products can access certain markets, which are otherwise closed and/or differentiated from uncertified competing goods. Regardless of certification status, all of Oregon's private and
state forestlands are subject to the requirements of the Oregon Forest Practices Act and comprehensive land use plans and as such, are held to standards that in many respects are like those of
certification systems.
In 2018, Oregon achieved certification with the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard on forest certification systems D7612-10 for wood grown and harvested under the Oregon
Forest Practices Act and compliance of subject wood to the 2012 and 2015 International Code Council (ICC) International Green Construction Code (IgCC). The recognition from ASTM will provide
opportunities for private and state forestlands to access additional markets for their forest products.
In 2019, the KPM was modified to reflect the percentage of industrial and non-industrial acres whose land is under an approved certification or management system. The percentage is based upon the
total acres of forestland in either the industrial or non-industrial classification. This revised reporting measure may improve understanding of the overall importance of this measure.
b. Along with forestry-related agencies and organizations, the marketplace encourages forest certification. Forestland owners wanting to sell timber increasingly find that milling facilities are requiring
their log supply come from certified forests. This market access requirement is motivating landowners to develop management plans, since forest certification systems require forest management
planning.
Non-industrial forestland owners often need assistance in developing inventory data and management documentation needed for certification. The cost of certification may represent a barrier for
smaller ownerships. Approximately 133 thousand owners hold forestland between 1 and 9 acres in size, accounting for 328,000 acres of forests. Another 27 thousand owners have forestland holdings
between 10 and 99 acres in size, accounting for 887,000 acres of family forests. The large number of owners with small holdings creates a significant challenge to achieving certification on all non-
industrial forestlands.
[1]
[1]
To increase certification on non-industrial forestlands, ODF needs to provide additional technical and financial assistance to landowners for development of management plans and procedures. ODF
does not receive any state support for this effort and relies solely on federal funding to conduct this work. ODF works with multiple organizations to promote the development of forest management
plans and the mutual recognition of approved plans.
In 2019, the KPM was modified to reflect the percentage of industrial and non-industrial acres whose land is under an approved certification or management system. The percentage is based upon the
total acres of forestland in either the industrial or non-industrial classification. This revised reporting measure may improve understanding of the overall importance of this measure. NOTE: Collection
dates varied for KPM 7 as follows:
SFI data – Retrieved from SFI website on June 24, 2024
ATFS data – Provided by Oregon Tree Farm System on June 10, 2024
FSC data - Provided by FSC on June 26, 2024
ODF; USDA-FS Forest Stewardship Plan data collected from USDA-FS SMART database on June 24, 2024
KPM #8 FOREST STREAM WATER QUALITY - Percent of monitored stream sites associated predominately with forestland with significantly increasing trends in water quality.
Data Collection Period: Oct 01 - Sep 30
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
a. Percent of monitored forested stream sites with significantly increasing trends in water quality
Actual 25% 25% 9% 16% 5%
Target 50% 50% 50% 50% 25%
b. Percent of monitored forested stream sites with significantly decreasing trends in water quality
Actual 5% 7% 4% 4% 14%
Target 5% 5% 5% 3% 5%
c. Percent of monitored forested stream sites with water quality in good to excellent condition
Actual 75% 75% 74% 74% 75%
Target 80% 80% 80% 80% 80%
How Are We Doing
a. In 2023, 5% percent of monitored forest stream sites showed increasing trends in water quality.  While the percent of forested streams with increasing trends in water quality has remained higher
than all other land uses (2% of all land uses show increasing trends in water quality) the target for monitored forest streams was not attained this year. However, most forested stream sites continue to
remain in the good to excellent category (75%).  The number of streams with good to excellent water quality has remained steady for over the past 7 years.   No increasing or decreasing trend was
observed on 81 percent of monitored forest stream sites.
The performance is based on the Oregon Water Quality Index (OWQI). The OWQI describes general stream water quality status and trends. The OWQI also shows the general effectiveness of water
quality management activities. No industry standards exist. However, 2023 data for agricultural lands in Oregon indicate 10 percent of monitored agricultural stream sites with increasing trends in
water quality. Statewide data for 2023 for all land uses, including agricultural and forest lands, indicate 7 percent of monitored stream sites with increasing trends in water quality.
b. In 2023 8  monitored sample points (14 percent) showed significantly decreasing trends in water quality.  This trend was prevalent on 42% of sites during this reporting period, which is significantly
higher than the previous year.   This is the first time since 2011 the percentage of declining scores across all parameters has exceeded 40 percent. It is important to note that about half of the ambient
sites statewide, and a large majority (75%) of forest monitoring sites continue to have "good" or "excellent" water quality and that has remained consistent over the last eleven years. No increasing or
decreasing trend was observed on 81 percent of monitored forest stream sites.
The performance is based on the Oregon Water Quality Index (OWQI). The OWQI describes general stream water quality status and trends. The OWQI also shows the general effectiveness of water
quality management activities. No industry standards exist. However, 2023 data for mixed land use in Oregon indicate 5 monitored stream sites showing a decreasing trend in water quality. Statewide,
data for 2023 for all land uses, including agricultural and forest lands indicate 38 monitored stream sites (24 percent) with decreasing trends in water quality.
c. In 2023, 75 percent of monitored forest stream sites showed "good" to "excellent" water quality, which is just slightly below the target of 80 percent. Except for the past 6 years, monitored sites on
forestland met or exceeded the target (which increased in 2018) every year since 2009 when this measure was established. About half of the ambient sites statewide continue to have "good" to
"excellent" water quality and that has remained consistent over the last ten years.  2023 is the second year that none of the monitored sites in forest land use have a status of very poor.
The performance is based on the Oregon Water Quality Index (OWQI). The OWQI describes general stream water quality status and trends. The OWQI also shows the general effectiveness of water
quality management activities. No industry standards exist. However, 2023 data for agricultural lands in Oregon indicate about 33 percent of monitored agricultural stream sites with water quality in
good to excellent condition. Statewide data for 2023 for all land uses, including agricultural and forest lands indicate about 50 percent of monitored stream sites with water quality in good to excellent
condition. These comparisons demonstrate that maintaining forestlands in forest use is an effective and efficient way to maintain water quality.
Factors Affecting Results
Additionally, statewide targets were revised in 2019. Where sites show significant improvement that is not affected by point source discharges, such improvements may be attributed to the following:
reduced levels of non-point source activity, increased education about water quality impacts, and watershed restoration efforts. Underlying all these factors are stream flow conditions as Oregon
transitions between drought and wet years, changes in stream flows may indirectly affect observed water quality.  A variety of activities occurring on forestlands, including forest management (timber
harvesting and road construction/use), fire suppression, recreation, and livestock grazing may impact soil and water resources. Disturbances that trigger large erosion events can produce important
changes in aquatic conditions. These episodic changes are critical in maintaining aquatic habitat over time, even though they may temporarily decrease water quality.
Disclaimer:  The OWQI used in this KPM is one of many tools to understand Oregon water quality conditions statewide.  The ambient network is not a randomly selected, statistically valid sample of
water quality conditions statewide. Sampling sites were selected to reflect the integrated effects of land use and point source discharges upstream of them. The data is representative of just the
sampling site and does not represent the water quality conditions of other locations in the same basin or of the whole river (DEQ, 2019).
KPM #9 VOLUNTARY PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INVESTMENTS MADE TO CREATE HEALTHY FORESTS - Cumulative public and private forest landowner investments made in voluntary projects
for the Oregon Plan for Salmon and Watersheds or for the Oregon Conservation Strategy.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Private forestland owner investment in Oregon Plan habitat restoration projects - $ in millions
Actual $107.92 $108.93 $110.72 $111.69 $112.25
Target $109.25 $112.50 $112.50 $112.50 $112.72
How Are We Doing
Private forestland owners have made significant investments in improving water quality and fish habitat. Reported cumulative investments for 2023 was $112.25 million compared to a target of
$112.72 million. The 2023 accomplishment level represents the fourth year out of seven, that cumulative private investments in Oregon Plan for Salmon and Watersheds (Oregon Plan) did not meet
the target. In 2023, private forestland owners invested $0.55 million which continues to show a high level of contribution from private forestland owners to improve water quality and fish habitat through
voluntary restoration measures.  The Department had expected the rate of expenditures to decline over time as more projects were completed and opportunities for restoration decreased.  During
2014-2023 period, restoration activities have increased (compared to the 2004-2013 period) based on the reported average annual contributions of approximately $1.6 million  per year for the current
period. Currently, data is not available for investments made under the Conservation Strategy (ODFW).
Oregon is unique among western states in its focus on voluntary measures, which work in concert with regulatory approaches to achieve additional habitat protection and restoration.
Voluntary restoration activities by landowners, combined with continued regulatory compliance, provide a foundation for the success of the Oregon Plan in protecting and restoring water quality and
fish habitat on forestland. The Oregon Conservation Strategy provides an analogous voluntary framework for restoration of all habitat types. The Conservation Strategy emphasizes proactively
conserving declining species and habitats to reduce the possibility of future federal or state listings. The strategy presents issues and opportunities and recommends voluntary actions that will improve
the efficiency and effectiveness of conservation in Oregon. The Department revised its stewardship agreement program to improve efficacy of encouraging forestland owners to self-regulate to meet
and exceed applicable regulatory requirements and achieve conservation, restoration, and improvement of fish and wildlife habitat and water quality.  The Department continues to implement a
programmatic Safe Harbor Agreement for Northern Spotted Owls to provide regulatory certainty and encourage voluntary enhancement of owl habitat for landowners who choose to participate. In
2019, the stewardship agreement tool had increased interest and resulted in nearly 32,000 acres enrolled because of a new agreement with one large landowner in Northwest Oregon who focused on
aquatic and terrestrial conservation strategies for listed threatened and endangered species.
Factors Affecting Results
The Oregon Plan has been successful because of the strong forestland owner community who work with watershed councils,  and the Department to achieve restoration and protection goals for
natural resources. There continues to be broad support for voluntary measures coupled with regulatory mandates. ODF Stewardship Foresters provide education and technical assistance to
landowners in support of restoration activities. With the start of the new decade in 2020, several negative factors created difficulties in implementing projects at the same scale as previous reporting
periods.  The 2020 Labor Day wildfires that severely impacted private forestland, the global pandemic resulting from COVID-19 resulting in uneven supply chains and demand dynamics, and instances
of severe weather events all of which shifted priorities to reforestation and restoration activities.  Economic and environmental conditions have stabilized recently and should result again in steady
investments and contributions to watershed restoration efforts.  At the start of 2024, the Department is implementing a revised regulatory and landowner assistance program that was associated with
recent legislation and the adoption of more protective administrative rules for forest operations near streams and other sensitive sites.  This legislation will provide additional resources to help
implement landowner assistance programs including the Oregon Plan and as of 2024 the Private Forest Accord grant program that is specially aimed at funding and implementing watershed scale
restoration projects.   The Oregon Plan funding supports coordination with watershed councils and other groups that encourage restoration.
The Department is aware that implementation may be occurring, but due to system complexities associated with the designated reporting system, reporting of voluntary restoration projects is not
occurring at a high enough percentage or is incomplete to capture a comprehensive view or encourage additional investments by private forestland owners.
KPM #10 STATE FORESTS NORTH COAST HABITAT - Complex forest structure as a percent of the State Forests landscape.
Data Collection Period: Jul 01 - Jun 30
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Complex structure as a percent of the State Forests landscape
Actual 10.39% 11.17% 11.23% 11.44% 11.38%
Target 30% 30% 30% 30% 30%
How Are We Doing
The amount of complex structure on State Forests demonstrates a steady or slightly increasing trend since 2018.  The decrease from 2017 to 2018 was largely a result of a change in how the amount
of complex structure is estimated.  When considered by District, the fiscal year 2023 data show that 16.99% of Astoria district, 10.06% of Forest Grove district, and 8.92% of Tillamook district are in
complex forest structure.
Factors Affecting Results
Complex forest structure develops very slowly, and it is anticipated to take decades to achieve the range of 30 to 50% complex structure now described in the forest management plans. ODF's Stand
Level Inventory (SLI) system is not designed to report on year-to-year differences but rather reflect our updated understanding of the landscape.
The year-to-year changes in complex structure are the result of updates to SLI data as well as active management designed to enhance the development of complex forest structure over time.
KPM #11 FIRE SUPPRESSION EFFECTIVENESS - Percent of wildland forest fires under ODF jurisdiction controlled at 10 acres or less.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Percent of wildland forest fires controlled at 10 acres or less
Actual 96.40% 93.47% 93.93% 95.83% 94.07%
Target 98% 98% 98% 98% 98%
How Are We Doing
The Department came to less than 4% under the target of suppressing 98 percent of all wildfires at ten acres or less in size for the 2023 fire season. We were 3.93% under target at 94.07%.
Factors Affecting Results
Influencing factors:  Fire Season 2023 was characterized by continuing drought and pulses of elevated, record-breaking heat events starting in mid-May through July. At the beginning of the season,
central and eastern Oregon were predisposed to severe to exceptional drought. And western Oregon, already abnormally dry especially in the western Cascades foothills, began to experience
repeated heat waves which rapidly melted the above-normal snowpack accumulated in winter and which quickly dried vegetation growing vigorously from spring rains. Drought conditions worsened
and expanded from the Cascades mountains toward the coast. Daily fuel moistures were already approaching 10-year minimums in early June. By mid-July, single digit humidity afflicted central and
eastern Oregon from the Cascades east. By August, the region braced for thunderstorms from the North American Monsoon known to bring lightning and potentially some moisture relief in late
summer to the interior west and points north. However, the monsoon rains were forecasted to be below average this season. On Aug 24-25, over 1,000 strikes of lightning lit up Oregon. Except for
northeast Oregon, moisture from the thunderstorms was mainly scattered and light. And this season, in an unusually dry landscape inundated by low humidity, heat waves, and winds, the lightning
storms produced over 100 fire ignitions in western Oregon, including the Smith River Complex in northern California with its Kelly Fire that burned about 12,529 acres across the state line. Ultimately,
however, response to this outbreak of fires is a striking testament to ODF initial attack success: nearly every ignition on ODF-protected lands from this event was extinguished upon discovery and only
one complex of fires grew to require an ODF IMT. In all, ODF’s initial attack prowess this year still put the agency at less than 1% below our KPM target.
KPM #12 PREVENTION OF HUMAN-CAUSED WILDLAND FOREST FIRES - Number of Oregon residents per human-caused wildland forest fires. (population expressed in thousands of residents)
This metric measures the ability to maintain or reduce the number of human-caused wildfires as the population of Oregon increases. An upward trend indicates a positive result.
Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Dec 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Number of Oregon residents per human-caused wildland fire
Actual 5.800 5.300 4.600 6.380 5.210
Target 5.200 5.300 5.300 5.300 5.300
How Are We Doing
Key Performance Measure #12 was modified during the 2019 Legislative Session to report as a number of Oregon residents per human-caused wildfire compared to previously reporting the number
of human-caused wildfires per 100,000 Oregon residents. With previously set legislative targets reporting on the number of fires, prior year data has been omitted from the report table. Results for the
2024 reporting year are reflected in the following narrative. (population expressed in thousands of residents).
The fire prevention program continues to examine new and effective approaches to prevent human-caused wildland fires. There were 824 human-caused wildland fires in 2023. With Oregon's
population in 2023 totaling 4,296,626 the resulting fire prevention rate of 5.21 thousand Oregon residents per human-caused wildland forest fire exceeded the target. The 10-year average of human-
caused wildland fires is 777 fires annually on ODF protected lands.
Factors Affecting Results
Steady increase in Oregon's population and the use of forestland for recreation as well as increasing rural residential home sites are key components for these results. Heavily populated areas of the
state, where weather and fuel conditions are aided by public activities, such as debris burning, equipment use, and forest recreation, drive the data.
KPM #13 DAMAGE TO OREGON FORESTS FROM INSECTS, DISEASES, AND OTHER AGENTS - Percent of forest lands without significant damage mortality as assessed by aerial surveys.
Data Collection Period: May 01 - Oct 31
* Upward Trend = positive result
Report Year 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Percent of Oregon forestlands without significant damage from insects, diseases and other agents
Actual 97.36% 97.67% 91.80% 93.54%
Target 99% 99% 99% 99% 99%
How Are We Doing
The percentage of Oregon forestlands without significant damage from insects, diseases and other agents has held steady the last few years but is again below recent KPM targets. The ongoing,
statewide drought will likely make Oregon forestlands more susceptible to biotic stressors. We anticipate that the percentage of Oregon forestlands without significant damage will hold steady or
decrease over time as our forestlands continue to be stressed by drought.
In 2023, we completed the entirety of our annual statewide aerial survey despite aircraft and staffing shortages. We conducted ground checks in known problem areas and areas damaged by
disturbance events such as recent storms, wildfire and chronic drought. From aerial and ground surveys, we observed that most tree mortality was likely caused by a combination of climate change
impacts and secondary attack by bark beetles. We recorded a (~300,000 acre) decrease in total observed mortality from abiotic and biotic factors in 2023 relative to the historical total in 2022. In 2023,
we observed that the majority of this mortality (1.1 million acres) occurred in true fir as a result of ongoing hot droughts and unmanaged root disease, followed by opportunistic bark beetle attack.
Invasive species are present across smaller regions of the state but attacking specific species. These invasive exotic species include: spongy moth (not established), emerald ash borer,
mediterranean oak borer, and sudden oak death. Cooperative statewide trapping surveys and monitoring for invasive spongy moth (previously gypsy moth) detected seven moths found across
Benton, Marion, Washington, and Deschutes counties in 2023. If moths are again found in 2024 trapping efforts, treatment will be applied. Emerald ash borer (EAB) was detected in Oregon in 2022 in
Forest Grove. Since then, a multiagency taskforce has applied a ‘slow-the-spread’ strategy which has prevented EAB from spreading beyond Washington County. Mediterranean oak borer was
detected in 2019 and was also found killing Oregon white oak in 2022. Since then, a multiagency taskforce has been active in mapping more infestations found in the tri-county area, worked with local
governments in applying management strategies, and worked with partners in California to research additional control strategies. Efforts to quarantine and slow the spread of Sudden Oak Death, an
exotic disease affecting tanoak, have been ongoing along the southwestern coast of Oregon. In 2023, SOD monitoring included 63 stream bait sites, ground transect surveys covering 210 acres on
private lands, and interpretation of 539,000 acres (842 square miles) of aerial imagery. Trees with the new clonal lineage of Sudden Oak Death (NA2) detected outside Port Orford in 2021 and
Humbug Mountain in December 2022 were treated within 300-600 foot buffer zones.
Factors Affecting Results
Over the last decade, an average of over 1 million acres of forest lands have been designated as having been significantly affected by insects, diseases, and other damaging agents during aerial
surveys. Thousands more acres are unhealthy and under-producing due to being overstocked, planted with off-site species, exposed to environmental stresses such as drought, and stagnating from
the suppression of natural fire cycles. These acres are becoming increasingly susceptible to damage by environmental stressors, insects and diseases. While the statewide aerial survey data provides
valuable information about key forest damaging agents, aerial surveys are just an estimate and are not able to evaluate the impact of many forest diseases, nor indicate the current or future risk of
forests to damage by environmental stressors, insects and diseases. In Oregon, thousands of acres of forests need active management to reduce the risk of insect outbreaks and catastrophic wildfires
to produce resilient and sustainable forests. A century of fire suppression and inconsistent forest management has resulted in thousands of acres of Oregon's forests becoming overstocked and
unhealthy. In addition, changing climatic conditions that contribute to drought directly cause damage or increase susceptibility to insects and disease. Thinning stands and prescribed fire to reduce
competition, promote tree health and vigor, and increase age and species diversity, have been shown to reduce the risk associated with many damaging insects and diseases – as well as increase
resilience to wildfire and climate change. Federal bark beetle mitigation grants, administered by the Department's stewardship foresters, provide cost share funds to landowners to implement activities
to improve forest health and increase stand resistance to bark beetles. Federal National Fire Plan funds also provide cost-share to landowners to improve forest health and prevent damage within the
wildland-urban interface. Additionally, statewide targets were revised in 2020.