Columbia River Gorge Commission
               Annual Performance Progress Report
                      Reporting Year 2019
                 Published: 9/3/2019 3:10:10 PM
 KPM #  Approved Key Performance Measures (KPMs)
1      County Decisions - Percentage and number of county decisions where Gorge Commission comments were addressed in the decision: a)fully; b) partially

2      Percentage of Commission Development Reviews in which Commission staff spend no more than 72 days to make a decision after the application is deemed complete. - When Commission staff require a different design or additional information fromthe applicant or a federal, state, or local agency, the days waiting for that information are not included in the 72-day staff decision period.

3      Customer Service - Percentage of customers rating their satisfaction with the agency's customer service as "good" or "excellent"; overall customer service, timeliness, accuracy, helpfulness, expertise and availability of information.
4      Percent of total best practices met by the Board. -
5      Number of presentations to civic and community groups each year - Increase public awareness of the National Scenic Area Act and Management Plan.

                                                                                                                                              red
                                                                                                                                              green
                                                                                                                                              yellow

 Performance Summary                                                                       Green                                  Yellow                                    Red

                                                                                                                                              = Target to -5%                         = Target -5% to -15%                         = Target > -15%
Summary Stats:                                                                                            40%                                     0%                                     60%
KPM #1  County Decisions - Percentage and number of county decisions where Gorge Commission comments were addressed in the decision: a)fully; b) partially
             Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Jan 01

* Upward Trend = positive result

                                                                                actual      target

  Report Year                                               2015                     2016                     2017                     2018                     2019
Percent of County Decisions- CRGC Addressed fully and partially
Actual                                                       88%                     100%                    100%                    100%                    100%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     95%

How Are We Doing
This measure reflects the relative effectiveness of the Commission's oversight of county implementation of the National Scenic Area Management Plan for the five counties that adopted an
ordinance to be consistent with the requirements of the Management Plan. The Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area Act authorizes counties to adopt and implement a local ordinance that
achieves the objectives of the Act. For those five counties who adopted the ordinance to be consistent with the Management Plan, the Commission plays two roles in support of local implementation:
first, it functions as a technical assistance resource for the county programs, and second, it serves to ensure consistency throughout the two-state, six-county region. On most county decisions, the
Commission observes, reviews and verifies their planning process and decisions without comment since consistency is achieved.  For those decisions where the Commission offers technical advice
or constructive suggestions, this performance measure indicates the percentage of Commission suggestions the counties fully accept in local decisions and the percentage for which counties
partially accept Commission comments.  In order to track this measure, the counties have to acknowledge that they accept or partially accept the comments by the Commission and refer to that in
their written findings.  The limited remaining percentage (not included in the measure) is the portion of county decisions which do not accept comments from the Commission or they may consider
the comments but do not acknowledge those comments in writing.

Data reflects figures for the calendar year. For the 2018 reporting year (CY 2017 data) development review applications submitted from Wasco, Hood River and Multnomah counties on the Oregon
side, and Skamania and Clark counties on the Washington side - 15 comment letters were issued by the Commission staff to the five counties. Of those 15 development applications that
Commission staff commented on, all 15 were fully or partially addressed.  For the 2019 reporting year (CY 2018 data) development review applications submitted - 15 comment letters were issued
by the Commission staff to the five counties. Of those 15 development applications that the Commission staff commented on, all 15 were fully or partially addressed. (Note: Klickitat County in
Washington did not adopt the ordinance so the Commission staff issue all the decisions on development review applications)
Factors Affecting Results
With the loss of two experienced senior planners in CY 2014, the Commission only had only one planning position filled until a second planner was hired in October 2015. Consequently, the
Commission was challenged with its ability to review all the development review applications for the five counties within the timeframe each county established for their review process. As a result,
the number of comment letters issued by Commission planning staff on development review applications was reduced significantly because each of the comment letters may require extensive
technical review and consultation with appropriate agencies.  In CY 2015, the Commission planner(s) issued five comment letters to the counties. Of those five applications, none of the decisions
had been issued yet so we could not measure whether our concerns had been fully or partially addressed. Consequently, we had no actual performance to submit for this measure for CY 2015. For
CY 2016, the Commission had two planners and issued 13 comment letters to the counties.  Of those 13, three decisions had not been issued yet, but the other 10 decisions addressed the
Commission's concerns. For CY 2017, the Commission issued 15 comment letters to the counties.  Of those 15, all 15 decisions addressed the Commission's concerns. For CY 2018, the
Commission issued 15 comment letters to the counties.  Of those 15, all 15 decisions addressed the Commission's concerns.
KPM #2Percentage of Commission Development Reviews in which Commission staff spend no more than 72 days to make a decision after the application is deemed complete. - When Commissionstaff require a different design or additional information from the applicant or a federal, state, or local agency, the days waiting for that information are not included in the 72-day staff
           decision period.
           Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Jan 01

*Upward Trend = positive result

                                                                                actual       target

  Report Year                                               2015                     2016                     2017                     2018                     2019

Percentage of development reviews issues within the required timeframe
Actual                                                       100%                    100%                     33%                     67%                     67%
Target                                                       90%                     75%                     80%                     80%                     85%

How Are We Doing
This measure reflects the ability of the Commission to complete its review of development applications in Klickitat County, who has not adopted the NSA ordinance, in a timely fashion and is relevant
to the effective and consistent implementation of the Management Plan.  In CY 2015, the planning staff included only one principal planner with another planner hired in October 2015. In January
2016 the principal planner accepted a position with another agency and in June 2016 the planner accepted another position. The Commission hired two new planners in June 2016.  This turnover
created a slow down in the Commission's ability to issue permits in a timely manner.  In July 2015, Klickitat County received a two-year grant in the FY15-17 Washington budget to hire a Klickitat
County planner to work with the Commission planner on development reviews for Klickitat County in the National Scenic Area.  This additional Klickitat County planner assisted with researching and
drafting development review decisions. The assistance of the Klickitat County planner helped the Commission planner to reduce the permit review time and cleared up part of the backlog of active
permits.  The Klickitat County planner accepted a position with another planning agency in the Gorge and resigned in January 2017.  The last 6 months of the grant funded position for FY 15-17
was left unfilled by Klickitat County, and consequently the Commission was again shorthanded and fell behind on the Klickitat County development reviews. In the FY 17-19 budget, Klickitat County
again received funds to hire a planner to help assist with Klickitat County development reviews.  This planner was hired as a Commission staff planner in August 2017, rather than as a county
employee as in CY 2016. This provided a benefit to the applicants because this planner was an employee of the Commission and could speak for the Commission, had access to all Commission
files, coordinated closely with state agencies, and had the authority to move forward on permits to address the backlog and conduct compliance monitoring which the county employee was not
authorized to do. This was an important step in the development review and permitting process - to assure that all conditions of the permit were met.  It is the Commission's goal to increase the
percentage significantly to 80% moving forward if additional grant funds will be available for the Commission to continue with employing a Klickitat County planner on staff.
This performance measure applies only to the Commission's work in Klickitat County, since they did not adopt the National Scenic Area (NSA) ordinance.  Thus the Commission staff do the
development reviews, whereas in the other 5 counties in the NSA, the county planners process the development applications and the Commission staff review them (refer to Performance Measure
1).  In response to budget reductions starting in 2008, the Commission temporarily suspended time frames for development review applications in 2010. With further budget reductions and the
resulting loss of 65% of the agency's planning staff in 2012, the Commission permanently amended its rule to remove all time frames for development review applications.  With the loss of two
experienced senior planners in CY 2014, the Commission had only one planning position filled until October 2015. However, to show some measurement of performance in CY 2015, the
Commission decided to use the 72-day rule time frame it had used previously.  This allowed a comparison for the calendar year to show the percentage of development reviews that the Commission
staff completed within the 72-day review period.  Due to planning staff turnover In CY 2015, the Commission was unable to meet the 72-day time frame. For the 2017 reporting year (CY 2016 data)
the staff was able to meet the 72-day time frame 30% of the time.  For the 2018 reporting year (CY 2017 data) the staff was able to improve its performance to 67% because of a dedicated Klickitat
County planner on the Gorge Commission staff. For the 2019 reporting year (CY 2018 data) the staff was able to maintain its performance at 67%. It is the Commission's goal to increase the
percentage significantly to 75% moving forward if additional planning staff can be hired using additional Klickitat County grant funds. Data reflects figures for the calendar year.

Factors Affecting Results
Internal factors that affect our results include overall staffing levels, workloads, and the number of professional planners that have the time to complete development reviews in a timely manner
given the other workload obligations of the Commission staff.  With the significant reductions in the number of planning staff during the last several bienniums, the time it takes to conduct thorough
reviews has increased and this has resulted in a decrease in being able to meet or exceed the timeline target for this measure.  External factors include the number and scope of proposed
developments in Klickitat County that have increased over time due to the popularity of the National Scenic Area as a place to work and live.  In addition, several requests for permits have involved
complex natural and cultural resources and land ownership issues that required several additional reviews by state wildlife and historical resources agencies, as well as water rights reviews,
development of new mitigation plans, and determination of legal lot parcels requiring complicated deed history searches. The Commission cannot move forward with issuing a permit without input
from the experts at the agencies, who are also on their own timelines to provide information to the Commission, which sometimes caused the Commission to exceed the 72 day goal.  In CY 2017, the
Commission received a grant from Klickitat County to hire a full-time land use planner to work on the development reviews for Klickitat County and to attend meetings.  This enabled the Commission
to hire a planner dedicated to Klickitat County development reviews which has helped to improve the completion rate and to meet the 72 day timeline goal more often.  This position was not involved
in any other Gorge Commission work, other than to attend Gorge Commission meetings, which provided a focus to their work and ability to complete the work in a more timely way.
KPM #3Customer Service - Percentage of customers rating their satisfaction with the agency's customer service as "good" or "excellent"; overall customer service, timeliness, accuracy,helpfulness, expertise and availability of information.
          Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Jan 01

                                                                         actual     target

 Report Year                                               2015                     2016                     2017                     2018                     2019
Helpfulness
Actual                                                        64%                     71%                     68%                     67%                     57%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     90%
Expertise
Actual                                                        73%                     71%                     63%                     60%                     71%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     90%
Accuracy
Actual                                                        64%                     71%                     47%                     53%                     57%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     90%
Timeliness
Actual                                                        82%                     71%                     53%                     53%                     57%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     90%
Overall
Actual                                                        73%                     71%                     63%                     67%                     67%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     90%
Availability of Information
Actual                                                        73%                     71%                     63%                     60%                     71%
Target                                                       75%                     75%                     75%                     75%                     90%

How Are We Doing
In CY 2011, the staff engaged in a new process for collecting survey results and as a result of the methodology change, response to the survey was much greater and encompassed all customers
and not just those that applied for a land use permit in one county.  The new survey mirrors best practices for surveys that are recommended by the state of Oregon.  The agency believes this
change in methodology reflects a broad range of customer opinion and experiences which was the Commission's intent. We hope to keep querying our partners and members of the public on a
broader basis in the future, and improve our scores as we build back our staff capacity and more fully engage our Commissioners in conducting public outreach and being available to provide
information and guidance to landowners and other agencies as needed. We have trained our staff in facilitation, effective public outreach and collaboration, as well as improving our communication
tools to help the public better understand our roles and responsibilities, and the regulations that govern the National Scenic Area.
Factors Affecting Results
The role of the Columbia River Gorge Commission, the National Scenic Area (NSA) Act and the Management Plan that guides our regulations to protect NSA resources, are not well enough
understood by the public.  The land use laws of both states differ and regional planning efforts are complex subjects. The NSA Act was passed over 30 years ago, but there continues to be public
misinformation about the National Scenic Area, the Commission's role and its work with County Commissions, city councils, county planners, state and federal agencies, economic development
entities, and landowners.  There are negative public perceptions dating from the past 3 decades that still persist today.  The 13-member Commission, appointed by the two state Governors, 6
counties, and the Secretary of Agriculture, and its small staff (6 FTE in 2019), continue to work hard to communicate to the public, partners, local, state and federal agencies about the policies and
management plan decisions. However, the lack of a communications expert, and lack of staff capacity to engage with more of our partners on a regular basis and raise our visibility, means that the
information is not as readily available as is desired.  The Commission and staff are working to inform and assist the general public, residents and land owners through the website and in-person
meetings, but only as our time allows given all our many day-to-day obligations to run the agency.  Given the staff turnover in CY 2016 and CY 2017, people rating our timeliness and customer
service was not as high as we had hoped due to learning curves for new staff.  Despite our small staff, however, we are committed to improve all aspects of customer service and to provide
opportunities for public participation and access to information in all aspects of the Commission's work moving forward. Improving our communication tools with the public and decisionmakers is a
very high priority.  Our customer satisfaction survey has been accessible on our website and also at our office in paper form.  We also recently installed a tablet on our front counter so that the
public can easily complete the satisfaction survey during their visit to our office.  We have found that this additional option of completing the satisfaction survey increases our percentage of surveys
completed.
KPM #4                  Percent of total best practices met by the Board. -
                                  Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Jan 01

* Upward Trend = positive result

                                                                                actual      target

  Report Year                                               2015                     2016                     2017                     2018                     2019
Percentage of total best practices met by the board
Actual                                                        78%                     100%                     98%                     93%                     89%
Target                                                       80%                     80%                     80%                     80%                     90%

How Are We Doing
This performance measure reflects the percent of total best practices met by the Commission, as assessed by the Commission members through an anonymous survey.  The best practices queried
in the survey include high-level indicators of the Commission's administrative processes.  This measure includes fifteen yes/no questions about the agency's performance in areas ranging from
Commissioners' meeting attendance to budget and personnel accountability.  Commissioner responses offer a general sense for the health of the agency and the administrative function of the
Commission staff.  The measures do not necessarily reflect the success of the Commission in achieving its federal,state or programmatic mandates. A new Executive Director was hired in CY 2015
and has worked effectively with the Commission to assure that all best practices are adhered to and they met their goals.

In 2012, the Commission held a training session to review the best practices established for the Commission and staff, based on the accepted best practices for Oregon state boards and
commissions.  There are fifteen best practices that the Commission has adopted and tracks each year.  Examples of these best practices include annual performance reviews of the Executive
Director, Commission review of policies, procedures, financial and IT audit findings, and involvement of the Commission in key communications.  The Commission continues its comprehensive
training process each year to assure all Commissioners are up to date with their understanding of their responsibilities, that they are adhering to Commission rules, conducting a periodic review of
their effectiveness, fostering transparency and accountability with their decisionmaking, and providing effective oversight of the Executive Director. Data reflects figures for the calendar year.  For
the 2017 reporting year (CY 2016 data), the board's assessment was 98%. In the 2018 reporting year (CY 2017 data), the board's assessment was 93% and for 2019 reporting year (CY 2018
data), the board's assessment was 90%.
Factors Affecting Results
Factors that can effect our results include turnover that occurs in the 13-member Commission since their appointments are staggered by year, appointments of a new Chair and Vice-chair each
year and how they lead the Commission, and any loss in key staff positions.
KPM #5  Number of presentations to civic and community groups each year - Increase public awareness of the National Scenic Area Act and Management Plan.
             Data Collection Period: Jan 01 - Jan 01

* Upward Trend = positive result

                                                                               actual      target

  Report Year                                               2015                     2016                     2017                     2018                     2019
Number of presentations to civic and community groups each year
Actual                                                     No Data                  No Data                  No Data                  No Data                     27
Target                                                      TBD                      TBD                      TBD                      TBD                      40

How Are We Doing
The Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area Act was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Ronald Reagan on November 17, 1986. The Columbia River Gorge Commission was
established in 1987 by the states of Oregon and Washington through an interstate compact, the Columbia River Gorge Compact. The purpose of the Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area
(NSA) Act is to protect and enhance the natural, cultural, scenic and recreation resources of the NSA, and to protect and support the economy of the Columbia River Gorge area. In accordance with
the Act, the Columbia River Gorge Commission and U.S. Forest Service adopted a National Scenic Area Management Plan in 1991 to guide land use in the Columbia River Gorge National Scenic
Area.  Covering 292,000 acres and 85 miles of the Columbia River in Oregon and Washington, the National Scenic Area is managed jointly by the Columbia River Gorge Commission and the U.S.
Forest Service.

Since the National Scenic Area was created, land uses were designated to be compatible with the intent of the Act and a Management Plan was adopted to guide land development decisions.  Any
new proposed developments outside the urban area boundaries are reviewed for impacts to the protected resources. The National Scenic Area attracts more than 2.5 million visitors who sightsee
and recreate, providing economic benefit to local communities.  In addition, the National Scenic Area attracts many new enterprises, small travel-related businesses, and industries that have created
jobs for people in communities who value the quality of life that the Columbia River Gorge provides.

The Gorge Commission is currently engaged in the largest and most comprehensive public outreach program since its inception in 1986 to develop the 10-year vision through the “Gorge 2020”
Management Plan review and update process.  Most of the current management plan is already 30 years old and outdated, requiring new policies and regulations to be developed to protect the
National Scenic Area for the next decade.  Complicated topics such as climate change or need for urban area boundary expansions were not originally envisioned, yet how the Gorge Commission
will address these will forever impact the National Scenic Area.  Being able to communicate the need for monitoring and enforcement, protecting tribal treaty rights, and balancing economic vitality
with resource protection is critical for the public to understand.   The Gorge Commission is committed to doing more public outreach workshops and engage residents and visitors in developing a
better and more understandable management plan that will guide development and protections policies for the next decade.  The Commission staff is working with local, state and federal agencies,
four Treaty Tribes, stakeholders in Oregon and Washington, as well as realtors, to better communicate information about the NSA, rules, regulations and permit requirements.

Factors Affecting Results
The role of the Columbia River Gorge Commission, the National Scenic Area (NSA) Act and the Management Plan that guides our regulations to protect NSA resources, are not well enough
understood by the public.  The land use laws of both states differ and regional planning efforts are complex subjects. The NSA Act was passed over 30 years ago, but there continues to be public
misinformation about the National Scenic Area, the Commission's role and its work with County Commissions, city councils, county planners, state and federal agencies, economic development
entities, and landowners.  There are negative public perceptions dating from the past 3 decades that still persist today.  The 13-member Commission, appointed by the two state Governors, 6
counties, and the Secretary of Agriculture, and its small staff (6 FTE in 2019), continue to work hard to communicate to the public, partners, local, state and federal agencies about the policies and
management plan decisions.  However, the lack of a communications expert, and lack of staff capacity to engage with more of our partners on a regular basis and raise our visibility, means that the
information is not as readily available as is desired.  The Commission and staff are working to inform and assist the general public, residents and land owners through the website and in-person
meetings, but only as our time allows given all of our many day-to-day obligations to run the agency. Our goal is to organize and/or participate in at least 40 meetings or gatherings that help the
public and agencies improve their understanding of the Gorge Commission and our role in managing the resources in the National Scenic Area.